chore: decide what to do with whitespaces (#43)
ec-europa/ecl-twig: docs/decisions/001-strip-whitespaces.md

# Strip whitespaces

| Status        | proposed <!--becomes accepted, rejected or superseded later--> |
| ------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Proposed**  | 2019-03-01                                                     |
| **Accepted**  | (the date the proposal was accepted/rejected)                  |
| **Driver**    | @yhuard                                                        |
| **Approver**  | (who will make the decision and merge the PR)                  |
| **Consulted** | (who you worked with on this decision)                         |
| **Informed**  | WAAT, contributors                                             |

## Decision

In order to avoid issues related to whitespace, we should strip them by default and only add them when needed.

## Context

Whitespaces can be a source of problems in HTML when not handled correctly.

> When we develop our components in the [main repository](https://github.com/ec-europa/europa-component-library), we use React, which [removes most of the whitespaces](https://reactjs.org/docs/jsx-in-depth.html#string-literals-1.). We don't specifically think about whitespaces and how the can impact the end result, since there are none.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we develop our components in the [main repository](https://github.com/ec-europa/europa-component-library), we use React, which [removes most of the whitespaces](https://reactjs.org/docs/jsx-in-depth.html#string-literals-1.). With such behavior from React, we don't think about whitespaces and how they can impact the end result after rendering.
```

> With Twig, we need to be careful about whitespaces. When they appear [between inline block elements](https://css-tricks.com/fighting-the-space-between-inline-block-elements/) or around content, they alter the output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, with Twig, we need to be careful with whitespaces. When they appear [between inline block elements](https://css-tricks.com/fighting-the-space-between-inline-block-elements/) or around content, they alter the output.
```

For example,

```html
Hello <a href="#">world!</a>
```

Is not the same as:

```html
Hello
<a href="#">
  world!
</a>
```

## Consequences

### Expected output

The output of a Twig template should not contain whitespaces — unless explictly required — in the following cases:

- between adjacent tags

  Expect:

  ```html
  <span></span><span></span>
  ```

  Avoid:

  ```html
  <span></span> <span></span>
  ```

- between a tag and its children

  Expect:

  ```html

>   <span><span></span><span></span></span>

Reviewer: Later in the document, a single `html` block contains `<!-- Do -->` and `<!-- Don't -->, might worth making consistent.

Author: instead of Expect/avoid, use Do/don't? is that it?

Reviewer: Both forms are ok, it would be easier to follow along the text if only one is used.

  ```

  Avoid:

  ```html
  <span>
    <span></span>
    <span></span>
  </span>
  ```

- between a tag and its text content

  Expect:

  ```html
  <span>Hello world!</span>
  ```

  Avoid:

  ```html
  <span>
    Hello world!
  </span>
  ```

  ```html
  <span> Hello world! </span>
  ```

### Concrete actions

#### Use the `spaceless` tag

Wrap your template within `{% spaceless %}`:

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
```html
{#
  Parameters:
  - ...
#}

{% spaceless %}

{# Pre-processing #}
{% set ... %}

{# Render #}
<my-component>
  ...
</my-component>

{% endspaceless %}
```

If you need to add a whitespace somewhere in your template, you can do it with: `{% endspaceless %}{{ ' ' }}{% spaceless %}`.

#### Use the whitespace control modifier on your tags when needed

> You can trim leading and or trailing whitespaces with `-` (dash), e.g:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can trim leading and trailing whitespaces with `-` (dash) in the following ways:
```

- `{{- my_var }}`: remove left whitespace
- `{{ my_var -}}`: remove right whitespace
- `{{- my_var -}}`: remove both whitespaces

It makes sense to use it when you print content between 2 tags:

> ```html

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Between adjacent tags:

```

Author: no sure about this specific change, wouldn't it break the markup here? (removing ```html)

Reviewer: I must have selected the wrong line, you're right.

<!-- Do -->
</span>
  {{- my_var -}}
<span>

<!-- Don't -->
</span>
  {{ my_var }}
<span>
```

> or inside a tag:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Or when inside a tag, i.e. between a tag and its children
```

```html
<!-- Do -->
<span>
  {{- my_var -}}
</span>

<!-- Don't -->
<span>
  {{ my_var }}
</span>
```

> But it doesn’t make sense in attributes,

Reviewer: An example why it doesn't make sense would be appreciated.

```html
<!-- Do -->
<span {{ my_var }} />

<!-- Don't -->
<span {{- my_var -}} />
```

or when there’s no space around:

```html
<!-- Do -->
</span>{{ my_var }}<span>

<!-- Don't -->
</span>{{- my_var -}}<span>
```

```html
<!-- Do -->
<span>{{ my_var }}</span>

<!-- Don't -->
<span>{{- my_var -}}</span>
```

Notes:

- `<span />` is used in these examples, but it could be any tag

> - `{{` can be replaced by any content-printing tag, e.g. `{% include '...' %}`, `{% embed '...' %}` or `{% block '...' %}`. In most cases, you don't need to remove the whitespaces on control structures (`if`, `for`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `{{` can be replaced by any content-printing tag, e.g. `{% include '...' %}`, `{% embed '...' %}` or `{% block '...' %}`. In most cases, you don't need to remove the whitespaces in control structures (`if`, `for`).
```

## Alternatives Considered

### Single-line output

> We could try to get the output of the Twig template to be on a single line but it would mean stripping all the newlines in the elements attributes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We could try to get the output of the Twig template to be on a single line but it would mean stripping all newlines from elements' attributes.
```

Concretely, it would mean replacing:

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
```html
<select
  id="{{ _id }}"
  name="{{ _name }}"
  class="{{ _css_class }}"
  {{ _disabled ? "disabled" }}
  {{ _extra_attributes|raw }}
>
```

With something like:

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
```html
<select
  {{- ' id="#{_id}"' -}}
  {{- ' name="#{_name}"' -}}
  {{- ' class="#{_css_class}"' -}}
  {{- _disabled ? " disabled" -}}
  {{- _extra_attributes|raw -}}
>
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

This approach is not feasible, because it makes the code harder to read and maintain, and it's also more error-prone.

```

```html
<!-- Do -->
</span>
  {{- my_var -}}
<span>

<!-- Don't -->
</span>
  {{ my_var }}
<span>
```

or inside a tag:

```html
<!-- Do -->
<span>
  {{- my_var -}}
</span>

<!-- Don't -->
<span>
  {{ my_var }}
</span>
```

But it doesn’t make sense in attributes,

```html
<!-- Do -->
<span {{ my_var }} />

<!-- Don't -->
<span {{- my_var -}} />
```

or when there’s no space around:

```html
<!-- Do -->
</span>{{ my_var }}<span>

<!-- Don't -->
</span>{{- my_var -}}<span>
```

```html
<!-- Do -->
<span>{{ my_var }}</span>

<!-- Don't -->
<span>{{- my_var -}}</span>
```

Note: `{{` can be replaced by any content-printing structure, e.g. `{% include '...' %}`, `{% embed '...' %}` or `{% block '...' %}`.

##### Complex scenario: the content is surrounded by Twig tags

Sometimes, you will find that control structures (`if`, `for`) and other Twig tags (like `set` or comments) may alter the output by introducing undesired whitespaces.

As a rule of thumb, it's good to start by removing all the whitespaces for these tags using the dash syntax, generate the snapshot of the finished component and then start removing the dash where they're unnecessary.

Here's the plan to follow:

> 1. the developper creates the component X with dashes on all the control structures and other tags that might generate whitespaces

Reviewer 2: small typo, should be developer in the two lines ;)

2. the developper takes the Jest snapshots and open a PR
3. the reviewer validates the component and the snapshots, and then merges the PR

> 4. the reviewer creates a Jira ticket: "Improve quality of component X". The goal of the ticket is to remove as many dashes as possible.

Reviewer 2: If i get it correctly the idea would be to apply blindly dashes to remove any potential whitespace, merge if the component looks god and after that creating a follow up ticket to verify if there's any chance to remove dashes here and there.
I haven't fully partecipated to the elaboration of this helpful document, but this flow looks inefficient to me, why don't we consider the usage of whitespace removal as any other "syntax" related thing? Ideally it should come as a "prettier" option, although it is something that might needs a case by case evaluation.

Reviewer 3: the issue is that there is no simple rule to determine if we should put a dash.
Sometime you have to add it to a `if`, sometimes you don't

Author: We can also write the whole code on a single line: this way, we are sure the code we produce is ok. React does it for us already. If we wanted to be 100% accurate on the ECL website, we should tell our beautifier to not add any newline and to not indent the code displayed in the showcase... but then, it wouldn't be really readable. 

Prettier describes it well I think: https://prettier.io/blog/2018/11/07/1.15.0.html#whitespace-sensitive-formatting 

The code produced by the twig template must work as expected. It should not introduce breaking whitespaces, as it was the case for the link component. The only way we have to ensure this is to remove all the whitespaces between an within HTML tags.

I hope this helps clarifying the context :)

This question of whitespaces is not only a matter of "syntax", it's not as choosing tabs vs spaces. 

`spaceless` is pretty good at removing whitespaces between HTML tags. The main issue we face is when we mix HTML tags and text. That's when things go bad...

## Decision

In order to avoid issues related to whitespaces, we should strip whitespaces between HTML tags by default and only add them when needed.

The Twig template is considered valid when the output it produces doesn't contain any whitespace:

> - between 2 HTML tags ;

Reviewer: I personally feel these 2 rules/guidelines are already a good base for being able to move forward with the document and it's implementation.
